The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lazarus Come Forth, by Ray Bradbury

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Lazarus Come Forth

Author: Ray Bradbury

Release Date: October 10, 2020 [EBook #63430]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAZARUS COME FORTH ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          Lazarus Come Forth

                            By RAY BRADBURY

             The Morgue Ship had gleaned information from
           space that would end the three hundred year war,
               knowledge that would defeat the aggressor
             Martians--if Brandon could carry it to Earth.

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Planet Stories Winter 1944.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Logan's way of laughing was bad. "There's a new body up in the
air-lock, Brandon. Climb the rungs and have a look."

Logan's eyes had a green shine to them, eager and intent. They were
ugly, obscene.

Brandon swore under his breath. This room of the Morgue Ship was
crowded with their two personalities. Besides that, there were scores
of cold shelves of bodies freezing quietly, and the insistent
vibration of the coroner tables, machinery spinning under them. And
Logan was like a little machine that never stopped talking.

"Leave me alone." Brandon rose up, tall and thinned by the years,
looking as old as a pocked meteor. "Just keep quiet."

Logan sucked his cigarette. "Scared to go upstairs? Scared it might be
your son we just picked up?"

Brandon reached Logan in about one stride, and while the Morgue Ship
slipped on through space, he clenched the coroner's blue uniform with
the small bones inside it and hung it up against the wall, pressing
inward until Logan couldn't breathe. Logan blew air, his eyes looked
helpless. He tried to speak and could only grunt like a stuck pig. He
waved his short arms, flapping.

Brandon kept him there, crucified on a fist.

"I told you. Let me search for my own son's body in my own way. I don't
need your tongue."

Logan's eyes were losing their shine, were getting blind and glazed.
Brandon stepped back, releasing the little assistant. Logan bumped
softly against metal flooring, his mouth hungry for air, his nostrils
flaring for breath. Brandon watched the little face of Logan over the
crouched, gasping body, with red color and anger shooting up into it
with every passing second.

"Coward!" he threw it out of himself, Logan did. "Got
yellow--neon-tubing--for your spine. Coward. Never went to war. Never
did anything for Earth against Mars."

Brandon said the words in slow motion. "Shut up."

"Why?" Logan crept back, inching up the metal hull. The blood pumps
under the skirts of the tables pulsed across the warm silence. "Does
it hurt, the truth? Your son'd be proud of you, okay. Ha!" He coughed
and spat. "He was so damn ashamed of you he went and signed up for
space combat. So he got lost from his ship during a battle." Logan
licked his lips very carefully. "So, to make up for it, you signed on a
Morgue Ship. Try to find his body. Try to make amends. I know you. You
wouldn't join the Space Warriors to fight. No guts for that. Had to
get a nice easy job on a morgue ship--"

Lines appeared in Brandon's gaunt cheeks, his eyes were closed, the
lids pale. He said, and tried to believe it himself, "Someone has to
pick up the bodies after the battle. They can't go flying on forever in
their own orbits. They deserve burial."

The bitterness of Logan struck even deeper. "Who are you tryin' to
convince?" He was on his feet now. "Me, it's different. I got a right
to running this ship. I was in the other war."

"You're a liar," Brandon retorted. "You hunted radium in the asteroids
with a mineral tug. You took this Morgue Ship job so you could go right
on hunting radium, picking up bodies on the side."

Logan laughed softly, but not humorously. "So what? Least I'm no
coward. I'll burn anybody gets in my way." He thought it over.
"Unless," he added, "they give me a little money."

Brandon turned away, feeling ill. He forced himself to climb up the
rungs toward that air-lock, where that fresh body lay, newly still-born
from space by the retrieving-claw. His palms let wet shining prints
on the rungs. His climbing feet made a soft noise in the cold metal
silence.

The body lay in the cold air-lock's center, as thousands had lain
before. Its posture was one of easy slumber, relaxed and not speaking
ever again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Brandon took in his breath. Numbly he realized it was not his son.
Every time a new body was found he feared and yet hoped it would be
Richard. Richard of the easy laughter and good smile and dark curly
hair. Richard who was now floating off somewhere toward some far
eternity.

Brandon's eyes dilated. He went to his knees and with efficient darts
of his eyes, he covered the vital points of this strange uniform with
the young body inside it. His heart pounded briefly, and when he got
up again he acted like he had been struck in the face. He walked
unsteadily to the rungs.

"Logan," he called down the hole in a numbed voice. "Logan, come up
here. Quick."

Logan climbed lazily up, emitting grunts and smoke.

"Look here," said Brandon, kneeling again by the body.

Logan looked and didn't believe it. "Where in hell'd you get that?"

Lying there, the face of the body was like snow framed by the
ebon-black of the hair. The eyes were blue jewels caught in the snow.
There were slender fingers reclining against the hips. But, most
important of all, was the cut of the silver metal uniform, the grey
leather belt and the bronze triangle over the silent heart with the
numerals 51 on it.

Logan held onto the rungs. "Three hundred years old," he whispered it.
"Three hundred years old," he said.

"Yes." The Numerals 51 were enough for Brandon. "After all these
centuries, and in perfect condition. Look how calm he is. Most corpse
faces aren't--pretty. Something happened, three hundred years ago, and
he's been drifting, alone, ever since. I--" Brandon caught his breath.

"What's wrong?" snapped Logan.

"This man," said Brandon, wonderingly, "committed suicide."

"How do you figure?"

"There's not a mark of decompression, centrifugal force, disintegrator
or ray-burn on him. He simply _stepped_ out of a ship. Why should a
Scientist of the 51 Circle commit suicide?"

"They had wars back there, too," said Logan. "But this is the first
time I ever seen a stiff from one of them. It can't happen. He shoulda
been messed up by meteors."

A strange prickling crept over Brandon. "When I was a kid, I remember
thumbing through history books, reading about those famous 51
Scientists of the Circle who were doing experimental work on Pluto back
in the year 2100. I memorized their uniforms, and this bronze badge.
I couldn't mistake it. There was a rumor that they were experimenting
with some new universal power weapon."

"A myth," said Logan.

"Who knows? Maybe. Maybe not. But before that super weapon was
completed, Earth fell beneath Mar's assault. The 51 Scientists
destroyed themselves and their Base when the Martians came.
The--myth--says that if the Martians had been only a month later--the
weapon would have been out of blueprint and into metal."

Brandon stopped talking and looked at the long-boned, easily slumbering
Scientist.

"And now he shows up. One of the original 51. I wonder what happened?
Maybe he tried to reach Earth and had to leap into space to escape the
Martians. Logan, we've got history with us, pulled in out of space,
cold and stark under our hands."

Logan laughed uneasily. "Yeah. Now, if we only had that weapon. Baby,
that'd be something to sing about, by God."

Brandon jerked.

Logan looked at him. "What's eating you?"

Brandon laid his fingers on the dead Scientist's skull.

"Maybe--just maybe--we _have_ got the weapon," he said.

His hand trembled.

       *       *       *       *       *

The coroner pumps throbbed warmly under the table, while manipulating
tendrils darted swiftly, effectively over the dead Scientist's body.
Brandon moved, too, like a machine. In a regular fury he had forced
Logan to hurry the body down into the preparations room, inject
adrenalin, thermal units, apply the blood pump and accomplish a
thousand other demanding and instantaneous tasks.

"Now, out of the way, Logan. You're more trouble than help!"

Logan stumbled back. "Okay, okay. Don't get snotty. It won't work. I
keep telling you. All these years."

Brandon could see nothing. Logan's voice was muffled, far away. There
was only the surge of pumps, the sweating heat of the little cubicle,
and niche number 12 waiting to receive this body if he failed. Brandon
swallowed, tightly. Niche number 12 waiting, cold, ready, waiting for a
body to fill it. He'd have to fight to keep it empty.

He began to sing-song words over and over as he injected stimulants
into the body. He didn't know where the words came from, from
childhood, maybe, from his old religious memories:

"Lazarus come forth," Brandon said softly, bending close, adjusting the
manipulatory tendrils. "Lazarus, come forth."

Logan snorted. "Lazarus! Will you can that!"

Brandon had to talk to himself. "Inside his brain he's got that energy
weapon that Earth can use to end the war. It's been frozen in there
three hundred years. If we can thaw it out--"

"Who ever heard of reviving a body after that long?"

"He's perfectly preserved. Perfectly frozen. Oh, God, this is Fate. I
know it. I feel it. Came to find Richard and I found something bigger!
Lazarus! Lazarus, come forth from the tomb!"

The machines thrummed louder, beating into his ears. Brandon listened,
watched for just one pulse, just one beat, one word, one moment of life.

"Air for the lungs," and Brandon attached oxygen cones over the fine
nose and relaxed lips. "Pressure on the ribs." Metal plates pressuring
the rib case slowly out and in. "Circulation." Brandon touched the
control at the foot of the table and the whole table tilted back and
forth in a whining teeter-tauter.

A report clipped through on the audio:

"Morgue Ship. Battle Unit 766 calling Morgue Ship. Off orbit of Pluto
234CC, point zero-two, off 32, one by seven, follow up. Battle just
terminated. Six Martian ships destroyed. One Earth ship blasted apart
and bodies thrown into space. Please recover. 79 men. Bodies in orbit
heading toward sun at 23456 an hour. Check."

Logan flipped his cigarette away. "That's us. We got work to do. Come
on. Let that stiff cool. He'll be here when we come back."

"No!" Brandon fairly shouted it, eyes wild. "He's more important than
all those men out there. We can help them later. He can help us now!"

The table came to a halt, bringing absolute silence.

Brandon bent forward to press his ear against the warmed rib-casing.

"Wait."

There it was. Unbelievably, there it was. A tiny pulse stirring like
a termite down under, softly and sluggishly moving through the body,
jabbing the heart and--NOW! Brandon cried out. He was shaking all over.
He was setting the machine in operation again, and talking and laughing
and going crazy with it.

"He's alive! He's alive! Lazarus has come from the tomb! Lazarus
reborn again! Notify Earth immediately!"

       *       *       *       *       *

At the end of an hour, the pulse was timing normal, the temperature was
lowering down from a fever, and Brandon moved about the preparations'
room watching every quiver of the body's internal organs through the
tubular-fluoroscope.

He exulted. This was having Richard alive again. It was compensation.
You roared into space looking somewhere for your lost self-respect,
your pride, looking for your son who is shooting on some soundless
orbit into nothing, and now the biggest child of Fate is deposited in
your arms to warm and bring to life. It was impossible. It was good.
Brandon almost laughed. He almost forgot he had ever known fear of
death. This was conquering it. This was like bringing Richard back to
life, but even more. It meant things to earth and humanity; things
about weapons and power and peace.

Logan interrupted Brandon's exultant thinking by blowing smoke in
his face. "You know something, Brandy? This is damn good! You done
something, Mister. Yeah."

"I thought I told you to notify Earth."

"Ah, I been watching you. Like a mama hen and her chick. I been
thinking, too. Yeah." Logan shook ashes off his smoke. "Ever since you
pulled in this prize fish, I been turning it over in my mind."

"Go up to the radio room and call Earth. We've got to rush the
Scientist to Moon Base immediately. We can talk later."

There was that hard green shine to Logan's narrow eyes again. He poked
a finger at Brandon. "Here's the way I get it. Do we get rewarded for
finding this guy? Hell, no. It's our routine work. We're _supposed_ to
pick up bodies. Here we got a guy who's the key to the whole damn war."

Brandon's lips hardly moved. "Call Earth."

"Now, hold on a moment, Brandy. Let me finish this. I been thinking,
maybe the Martians'd like to own him, too. Maybe they'd like to be
around when he starts talking."

Brandon made a fist. "You heard what I said."

Logan put his hand behind him. "I just want to talk peaceable with you,
Brandy. I don't want trouble. But all we'll get for finding this stiff
is a kiss on the cheek and a medal on the chest. Hell!"

Brandon was going to hit him hard, before he saw the gun in Logan's
fingers, whipped out and pointing.

"Take a look at this, Brandy, and don't lose your supper."

In spite of himself, Brandon quailed. It was almost an involuntary
action. His whole body plunged back, aching, pulling with it.

"Now, let's march up to the radio room. I got a little calling to do.
Get on with you. Hup!"

In the radio-room, Logan touched studs, raised a mike to his lips and
said:

"Beam to Mars. Beam to Mars. Morgue Ship of Earth calling. Mars Beam
answer."

After an interval, Mars gave answer. Logan said:

"I've just picked up the body of a 51 Circle Scientist. He's been
resuscitated. Give me your fleet commander. I got things to talk over
with him." Logan smiled. "Oh, _hello_, commander!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Half an hour later, the discussions were over, the plans made. Logan
hung up, satisfied. Brandon looked at him as if he couldn't believe he
was serious.

Back down in the control room, Logan set a course, and then forced
Brandon to get the body ready. He bragged about the deal. "A half ton
of radium, Brandy. Not bad, eh? Good pay. More than Earth'd ever give
me for my routine duty."

Brandon shuddered. "You fool. The Martians will kill us."

"Uh-uh." Logan pantomimed him into moving the body onto a rollered
table and taking it to the emergency life-craft air-lock. "I'm not that
dumb. I'm having you wire this emergency life-boat with explosive. We
collect the minerals first. We blow up the body if the Martians act
funny. We make them wait until we've collected our half and gotten five
hours' start toward Earth before we allow them to pick up the body.
Nice, huh?"

Brandon swayed over the task of wiring the life-boat with explosive.
"You're cutting your own throat. Handing over a weapon like that to
the Martian enemy."

It was no again from Logan. "After the Martians pick up the body and
we're safely on our way home to Earth, I press a button and the whole
damn thing blows up. They call it double-crossing."

"Destroy the body?"

"Hell, yes. Think I want a weapon like that turned over to the enemy?
Guh!"

"The war'll go on for years."

"So Earth'll wind up winning, anyhow. We're getting along, slow but
sure. And when the war's over, I got a load of radium to set myself up
in business and a big future in front of me."

"So you kill millions of men, for that."

"What'd they do for me? Ruined my guts in the last war!"

There had to be some argument, something to say, quick, something to
do to a man like Logan. Brandon thought, quickly. "Look, Logan, we can
work this, but save the body."

"Don't be funny."

"Put one of the _other_ bodies in the ship we send out. Save Lazarus'
body and run back to Earth with it!" insisted Brandon.

The little assistant shook his head. "The Martians'll have an
intra-material beam focused on the emergency ship when they get within
one hundred thousand miles of her. They'll be able to tell then if the
body's dead or alive. No dice, Brandy."

It was hardly like leaping himself, thought Brandon. It was just
frustration and rage and unthinking action. Brandon jumped. Logan
hardly flicked an eyelid as he pressed the trigger of his paragun. It
paralyzed the legs from under Brandon and he collapsed. The gun sprayed
over his groin and chest and face, too, in a withering shower of
red-hot needles. The lights went out.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a loose sensation of empty space, and acceleration minus
power. Pure soundless momentum. Brandon forced his eyes open painfully,
and found himself alone in the preparations' room, lying stretched upon
one of the coroner tables, bound with metal fibre.

"Logan!" he bellowed it up through the ship. He waited. He did it
again. "Logan!"

He fought the metal fibre, knotting his fists, twisting his arms. He
yanked himself back and forth. It pretty well held, except for a
looseness in the right hand binding. He worked on that. Upstairs, a
queer, detached Martian bass voice intoned itself.

"500,000 miles. Prepare your emergency craft with the body of the
Scientist inside of it, Morgue Ship. At 300,000 miles, release the
emergency craft. We'll release _our_ mineral payment ship now, giving
you a half hour leeway to pick it up. It contains the exact amount you
asked for."

Logan's voice next:

"Good. The Scientist is alive, still, and doing well. You're getting a
bargain."

Brandon's face whitened, bringing out all the hard, scared bones of
it, the cheeks and brow and chin bones. He jerked against the binding
and it only jumped the air from his lungs so he sobbed. Breathing
deeply, he lay back. They were taking his child back out into space.
Lazarus, his second son, whom he had birthed out of space with a metal
retriever, they were taking back out and away from him. You can't
have your real son; so you take the second best and you slap him into
breathing life, into breathing consciousness, and before he is a day
old they try to tear him away from you again. Brandon fairly yelled
against his manacles of wire. Sweat came down his face, and the stuff
from his eyes wasn't all sweat.

Logan tiptoed down the hard rungs, grinning.

"Awake, Sleeping Beauty?"

Brandon said nothing. His right hand was loosened. It was wet and
loosened, working like a small white animal at his side, slipping from
its wire trap.

"You can't go ahead with it, Logan."

"Why not?"

"The Earth Tribunal will find out."

"You won't tell them." Logan was doing something across the room.
He was the only moving thing in front of a hundred cold shelves of
sleeping warriors.

Brandon gasped, tried to get up, fell back. "How'll you fake my death?"

"With an injection of sulfacardium. Heart failure. Too much pulse on a
too old heart. Simple." Logan turned and there was a hypodermic in his
hand.

Brandon lay there. The ship went on and on. The body was upstairs,
lying breathing in its metal cradle, mothered by him and jerked to
life by him, and now going away. Brandon managed to say:

"Do me a favor?"

"What?"

"Give me the drug now. I don't want to be awake when you send Lazarus
out. I don't want that."

"Sure." Logan came walking across the deck, raising the hypodermic. It
glittered hard and silver fine, and sharp.

"One more thing, Logan."

"Hurry it up!"

Only one arm free, one leg able to move slightly. Logan was pressing
against the table, now. The hypodermic hesitated in his fingers.

"This!" said Brandon.

       *       *       *       *       *

With one foot, Brandon kicked the teeter-tauter control at the base
of the board. The board, whining, began to elevate swiftly. With his
free arm, instantly pulling the last way free from the wire, Brandon
clutched Logan's screaming head and jammed it down under the table,
under the descending board. Board and metal base ground together and
kept on going three inches. Logan screamed only once. The sounds after
that were so horrible that Brandon retched. Logan's body slumped and
hung, arms slack, hypo dropped and shattered on the deck.

The whole table kept going up and down, up and down.

It made Brandon sicker with each movement. The whole room revolved,
tipped, spun sickishly. The corpses in all their niches seemed to
shiver with it.

He managed to kick the control to neutral and the table poised,
elevated at the heels, so blood pounded hotly into Brandon's pale
face, lighting, coloring it. His heart was pounding furiously and the
chronometer upon the hull-wall clicked out time passing, time passing
and miles with it, and Martians coming so much the closer....

He fought the remaining wires continuously, cursing, bringing threads
and beads of blood from raw wrist, ankle and hips. Red lights buzzed
like insects on the ceiling, spelling out:

"ROCKET COMING ... UNKNOWN CRAFT ... ROCKET APPROACHING...."

Hold on, Lazarus. Don't let them wake you all the way up. Don't let
them take you. Better for you to go on slumbering forever.

The wire on his left wrist sprang open. It took another five minutes to
bleed himself out of the ankle wires. The ship spun on, all too quickly.

Not looking at Logan's body, Brandon sprang from the table and with
an infinite weariness tried to speed himself up the rungs. His mind
raced ahead, but his body could only sludge rung after rung upward into
the radio room. The door to the emergency rocket boat was wide and
inside, living quietly, cheeks pink, pulse beating softly in throat,
Lazarus lay unthinking, unknowing that his new father had come into his
presence.

Brandon glanced at his wrist chronometer. Almost time to slam that
door, shoving Lazarus out into space to meet the Martians. Five minutes.

He stood there, sweating. Then, decided, he put a tight audio beam
straight on through to green Earth. Earth.

"_Morgue Ship coming home. Morgue Ship coming home! Important cargo.
Important cargo. Please meet us off the Moon!_"

Setting the ship controls into an automatic mesh, he felt the
thundering jets explode to life under him. It was not alone their
shaking that pulsed through his body. It was something of himself, too.
He was sick. He wanted to get back to Earth so badly he was violently
ill with the desire. To forget all of war and death.

He could give Lazarus to the enemy and then turn homeward. Yes, he
supposed he could do that. But, give up a second son where you already
have given up one? No. No. Or, destroy the body now? Brandon fingered
a ray-gun momentarily. Then he threw it away from him, eyes closed,
swaying. No.

And if he should try to run away to Earth now? The Martians would
pursue and capture him. There was no speed in a Morgue Ship to
outdistance superior craft.

Brandon walked unsteadily to the side of the sleeping Scientist. He
watched him a moment, touching him, looking at him with a lost light in
his eyes.

Then, he began the final preparations, lifting the Scientist, going
toward the life rocket.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Martians intercepted the emergency life-rocket at 5199CVZ. The
Morgue Ship itself was nowhere visible. It had already completed its
arc and was driving back toward Earth.

The body of Lazarus was hurried into the hospital cubicle of the
Martian rocket. The body was laid upon a table, and immediate efforts
were made to bring it out of its centuries of rest.

Lazarus reclined, silver uniform belted across the middle with soft
mouse-grey leather, bronze symbol 51 over the heart.

Breathlessly, the Martians crowded in about the body, probing,
examining, trying, waiting. The room got very warm. The little purple
eyes blinked hot and tensed.

Lazarus was breathing deeply now, sighing into full aware life, Lazarus
coming from the tomb. After three hundred years of avoid death.

Armed guards stood on both sides of the medical table, weapons poised,
torture mechanisms ready to make Lazarus speak if he refused to tell.

The eyes of Lazarus fluttered open. Lazarus out of the tomb. Lazarus
seeing his companions, iris widening upon itself, forcing shape out of
mist. Seeing the curious blue skulls of anxious Martians collected in a
watching crowd about him. Lazarus living, breathing, ready to speak.

Lazarus lifted his head, curiously, parted his lips, wetted them with
his tongue, and then spoke. His first words were:

"What time is it?"

It was a simple sentence, and all of the Martians bent forward to catch
its significance as one of the Martians replied:

"23:45."

Lazarus nodded and closed his eyes and lay back. "Good. He's safe then,
by now. He's safe."

The Martians closed in, waiting for the next important words of the
waking dead.

Lazarus kept his eyes closed, and he trembled a little, as if, in spite
of himself, he couldn't help it.

He said:

"_My name is Brandon._"

Then, Lazarus laughed....





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lazarus Come Forth, by Ray Bradbury

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAZARUS COME FORTH ***

***** This file should be named 63430.txt or 63430.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/4/3/63430/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
